# Mental Health in US Counties <br/>STAT  471 Final Project<br/>Emily Kanter and Katie Rush<br/>December 20, 2021

In 2019, it was reported that approximately 19.86% of American adults experienced some form of mental illness. Past research shows that mental health is strongly related to demographic factors and social determinants of health. While support exists to improve mental health on the individual level, we wanted to expand on research to address mental health on a larger scale. Therefore, for our final project, we attempted to predict the average number of mentally unhealthy days per month on a county level, using a set of selected features. 

We gathered data from the US Decennial Census and the 2019 County Health Rankings National Dataset. After cleaning and merging the datafiles, our tidy dataset comprised 2,371 observations (i.e. counties) and 65 columns. Our explanatory variables fell into six major categories: (1) health outcomes, (2) health behaviors, (3) clinical care, (4) social and economic environment, (5) physical environment, and (6) demographic information. Our response variable of interest was mentally unhealthy days, the average number of mentally unhealthy days reported by a specific county in the United States. 

After we split the data into a training and a test set, we explored the correlations between the features and the relationship between the features and the response. With the data exploration in mind, we fit six predictive models: (1) an ordinary least-squares regression, (2) a ridge regression, (3) a lasso regression, (4) a decision tree, (5) a random forest, and (6) a boosted tree. 

We then compared the six models on account of method performance using their mean-squared test error. We found that boosting and random forest yielded the highest predictive performance, while the decision tree had the worst predictive performance. It appeared that the averaging and aggregating of the boosted tree and random forest drastically improved the instability of the decision tree, leading to lower test errors. The lasso model performed better than the ridge model, suggesting that a smaller subset of the total features were actually predictive of the number of mentally unhealthy days. 

Interestingly, we found that all models pointed to the percentage of smokers in the county as the most important feature in predicting the number of mentally unhealthy days. Other important predictive features tended to fall into the health behavior and the social and economic environment subcategories. Some examples include: percent excessive drinking, percent insufficient sleep, percent free or reduced lunch, and household income. For most features, the relationship with the response followed our intuition. The higher the percentage of detrimental health behaviors (i.e. smoking, insufficient sleep, diabetes), the higher the predicted number of mentally unhealthy days. We hope to use the information gained from this analysis to better inform policies targeted at improving mental health across all counties in the United States.  

Interestingly, we found that the boosted and elastic net regression both pointed to similar types of variables as the strongest predictors of deaths per cases. Specifically, our optimal boosted model revealed that variables related to residential segregation and unemployment emerged as the most significant predictors, revealing that structural economic and health access inequalities were more predictive of COVID-19 deaths per cases than other variables. We hope that this analysis can inform policies aimed at improving health outcome determinants, both in the context of COVID-19 and more generally going forward. 
